Performance Score Improvement blog post (#114)
getsentry/sentry.engineering: data/blog/how-we-improved-performance-score-accuracy.md

---
title: 'How we improved Performance Score accuracy'
date: '2024-01-17'
tags: ['javascript', 'performance', 'web']
draft: true
summary: "We're making updates to how Performance Scores are calculated in the Web Vitals module, which will bring them closer to what your users experience."
images: ['/images/how-we-improved-performance-score-accuracy/hero.jpg']
layout: PostLayout
canonicalUrl: performance-score-improvements
authors: ['edwardgou']
---

Last year in November, we released the Web Vitals module for Sentry's Performance product. Aside from helping users monitor and improve their Web Vitals, this new module also introduced [Sentry Performance Scores](https://docs.sentry.io/product/performance/web-vitals/#performance-score) for all web browser applications. As a quick reminder, Performance Scores are used to condense multiple Web Vitals and their respective thresholds into an overall score from 0-100 that rates an app's perceived performance, based on real user data for Web Vitals.

> Today, we are making updates to how Performance Scores are calculated. These updates will improve the accuracy of these scores by bringing them closer to what users experience on your web apps. To understand how these changes will impact your Performance Scores, it's useful to understand how they used to be calculated. Here's a brief overview:

Reviewer: This makes sense, but the tone is more like a product announcement than a technical post. This is why I was curious why this is an engineering blog post rather than the regular blog, since the style is more of a product announcement

Author: 👍 noted. I agree, there's a pretty big product announcement element to this post. We're choosing this avenue because there's a lower barrier here, we want to get this message out asap, and there are some technical details that feel suitable here. @zoesyc 

I've updated the content in this post with more of the technical content relating to your feedback below, so hopefully this post doesn't feel out of place anymore.

1. Your users visit your webpage which generate pageload transactions. These transactions contain [Web Vitals](https://docs.sentry.io/product/performance/web-vitals/) (LCP, FCP, FID, TTFB, CLS) and get sent to Sentry.
2. In the Sentry Web Vitals module, each web vital is aggregated to get the p75 value.

> 3. The p75 value of each Web Vital is then put through a non-linear function which generates individual Web Vital component scores. Each component score is then statically weighted and summed to produce an overall Performance Score out of 100 for your web app. You can find out more about how these are calculate [here](https://docs.sentry.io/product/performance/web-vitals/#performance-score).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. The p75 value of each Web Vital is then put through a non-linear function which generates individual Web Vital component scores. Each component score is then statically weighted and summed to produce an overall Performance Score out of 100 for your web app. You can find out more about how these are calculate [in our documentation](https://docs.sentry.io/product/performance/web-vitals/#performance-score).
```

It's usually better (for readability, SEO, and A11y) to have more descriptive link titles

Reviewer: Also, if the engineering blog supports equation rendering, it would be highly baller and useful to put the whole equation here. People will definitely want to know that without having to click out!

Author: Updated! Good suggestion on the equation rendering, I've added some of that to the post!
![image](https://github.com/getsentry/sentry.engineering/assets/83961295/7c705f45-6b63-4c73-9008-dfdfcaa52abc)

While the above approach gives some of the signal that we're looking for, there are some drawbacks that affect how accurately our Performance Scores reflect what users experience:

- Performance Scores can be skewed based on outlier pageloads if the Web Vitals are extreme enough.

> - Some Web Vitals may be reported less frequently, depending on [browser support](https://docs.sentry.io/product/performance/web-vitals/#browser-support). These Web Vitals end up overrepresented in Performance Scores because we use static weights.

Reviewer: I think a quick example for each would be helpful! People might not be able to visualize what "static weights" are, especially since the equation isn't described above

Author: Updated to add more detail. I'm hoping with the equation rendering above, the weights concept will be more obvious

Ideally, our Performance Scores should feel true to what users experience on our web app. If our web app is fast and responsive, our Performance Scores should positively reflect that. Additionally, Performance Scores should show a consistent relationship when drilling down from web app, to pages, to pageloads.

To demonstrate the issues mentioned above, let’s consider a scenario where we have three pageload transactions, with the following **LCP** values and thresholds:

```
Good    | Meh     | Poor
-----------------------------
<1200ms | <2400ms | >= 2400ms

300ms  -> Good
400ms  -> Good
8000ms -> Poor

> ```

Reviewer: This part confused me a bit, maybe worth breaking up! 

1. It's not necessarily obvious that a measure is mapped to a rating like "good", the post doesn't describe that
2. The table and the examples flow together. If you keep the table markup separate, it'll render as an HTML table, which helps. Then, you can write something like "Let's say three page load transactions come in with the following LCP values, and corresponding ratings

Author: I opted to remove the `Good` `Meh` and `Poor` thresholds here, since they're mostly part of the UI and not actually involved in the score calculation at all.

> Aggregating the LCP values above would get a p75 of 4200ms, which equates to an LCP score of **26**. Although two of the samples in the scenario have very performant LCP values, the one outlier sample overly skews the LCP score negatively.

Reviewer: > Aggregating the LCP values above would get a p75 of 4200ms, which equates to an LCP score of **26**

Another place where I think it would be perfect to work through an example. Otherwise I can't really tell how you got those values, and why it's a problem

> A better approach would be to calculate the Performance Score of each pageload transaction on ingestion, and then aggregate for an overall score. If any Web Vitals are missing on a pageload transaction, we can dynamically adjust weights to exclude those missing Web Vitals. Using the example above, we get the following approximate LCP score values

Reviewer: > on ingestion

This might not be meaningful to readers, I think it'd help to explain in more detail the difference between calculating the score at query time or render time, and calculating during collection

Reviewer: Also, the backend setup in which weights are stored next to the measurements is highly cool and interesting, and people would love to learn about that, I bet

Author: Tried to flesh out the difference between old and new approach a bit more.
I think I may skip the backend setup for weights since there's quite a lot that goes into it and I don't want to lengthen/complicate the post more than it already is. Let me know if you feel this is important context though, I can revisit.

```
300ms  -> 99
400ms  -> 99
8000ms -> 7
```

> Averaging the scores above gets us a score of **68**. Compared to the previous score of **26**, this new score of **68** lines up much better with what we would expect for 2 fast pageloads and 1 slow pageload. This is how we will be calculating Performance Scores going forward. As a result of improved Performance Score accuracy, we’ll also see more accurate [Opportunity Scores](https://docs.sentry.io/product/performance/web-vitals/#opportunity) as well.

Reviewer: > Averaging the scores above gets us a score of **68**

Oh, it changed from p75 to avg?

> Due to the updates we're deploying to Performance Score calculations, users may see a change in their data the next time they visit the Web Vitals module. For most users, this may mean an increase in their Performance Score due to the correction in outliers no longer skewing scores negatively.

Reviewer: This also reads a bit like a product announcement 🤔
